---
layout: post
title: Serifs vs Sans-Serifs
date: 2021-12-05T15:02:10.162Z
image: ../uploads/serifs-vs-sans-serifs.jpg
title_color: "#ffffff"
comments: false
tags:
  - Design
  - Fonts
  - Books
---
## Typefaces and readability.

Despite the diverse range of book covers, certain genres can be distinguished from others based on their shared characteristics, some of which are most identifiable by the typography used in the design. The typeface reflects the concept of the novel it is designed for; serif characters are most commonly used to portray the soft elements of femininity in romance novels, but can also be seen to convey the visually-rich worlds of abstraction depicted across the genre of fantasy. 

The typeface may be illustrated with decorative elements, such as a tail, the design is typically recognised as novelty or script. Alternatively, it could be styled using a ‘hairline’ characteristic, which is a thin stroke on a serif typeface. These elements appear delicate and dreamy, creating a connotation to the illusive tales of affection told in romance books. Likewise, fantasy books frequently make use of a novelty or script typeface for the cover design. Titles can also be presented in ‘old style’ or ‘neoclassical’ curled characters, with long tails or swashes. The metallic designs of ‘blackletter’ and ‘glyphic’ characters can also be used for the typography displaying the book title, as both have strong associations with the times of dark myths and folklore. The fantasy genre has an extensive archive of books which displays the title using distinctive typefaces, specifically designed for an individual series of titles, which achieves a sense of exclusivity, arguably imitating the eccentric nature of the inside of the books. Over time, the unique design of the typography may be a significant factor of the novel’s identifying mark, becoming a prominent element of the brand.

On the other hand, this style of typography is not commonly used on sci-fi books and similar subgenres of fantasy, a sans serif typeface may be used instead. Likewise, contemporary romance novels are slowly drifting away from the common application of serif characters, an example of this would be *A Lover’s Discourse* by author Xiaolu Guo. Sans serif characters are commonly displayed using a monospaced typeface, the design may also have high contrast qualities. The typeface can create an impression of modernity, the minimalist appearance of straight cut characters is suitable to portray the contemporary ideas embodied by romance novels which integrate genres such as self-improvement, or the theme of technological advancement depicted in science fiction. However, sans serif characters are applied to multiple genres other than the two mentioned; academic books often convey titles using sans serifs to communicate the content in a clear and precise manner, whereas, crime novels utilise the cold and unsympathetic sense created by sans serif characters to portray the dark nature of unsolved crimes.

Although both serifs and sans serifs are frequently used for book cover designs, it may be argued that the variety in the flow of lines and curves as displayed in a serif typeface is more readable and enjoyable for the reader. The characteristics of serif typefaces such as contrast in weight, how condensed the characters appear, or the tails and hairlines which extend the character, all engage the reader of the text more. The range is far more inviting than the monolithic sans serif typeface; as the diversified text offers the reader a sense of intellectual stimulation with the way the text is set in motion, due to prominent and multi-component contrast in stroke. All those factors have been used to construct the argument that serif characters are more readable than sans serifs when applied to the inside text of print books, but ebooks typically adapt this too to offer a sense of familiarity the reader may have in relation to their experience of reading print. A contrasting argument would be that serif characters are not readable on signs, in particular numbers styled in a serif typeface. Whether it would be on fire exit signs, road signs or warning signs, most commonly the chosen typeface is displayed using sans serif characters. The possible reason for this is that regardless of scale, sans serifs remain legible. This is something that readers of serif characters may struggle with, as the readability decreases with size due to various characteristics which differentiate serifs from sans serif (small lines and strokes attached to characters). In addition, it could be implied that sans serifs are more precise and present themselves in a serious tone, compared to a serif typeface which may appear decorative. However, both arguments are validated solely based on the common design which over time has become the norm. The counter argument of readability of serif fonts is debunked by peculiar and unique formats used for the inside of books. An example of this would be *Take me with you* written by David Levithan and Jennifer Niven; the book is told through a series of emails adapting not only the format, but also the appearance as the text is displayed in sans serifs, replacing the typical text design of a serif typeface.